Hey, guys, and welcome back
to another exciting video.
And in this particular video, let's
cover the topic of middlewares.
So this middleware thing in Express
is really, really, really powerful
and very important to understand.
And trust me, I am going
to make the understanding
of middlewares so easy.
Okay, so in the previous,
class, or I can say in the previous
video, we have built this
project that was a bookstore.
We have used one middleware
that was this express JSON.
And kind of, you have at least
I think 1 or 2% idea that what
this line is doing, right?
It is doing some magical
things inside it
that uses the headers, I.e.
content type JSON and converts the
body into a JSON and gives us the
access as a body so that if there
is a, post route, we can use
request body to get what is inside
the body.
Now let's understand
that what exactly is a middleware?
And now you are going
to understand this particular
middleware in a more cool way.
Okay?
Okay.
In a more good way, I should say.
So let's start with the middleware.
So let's say that you have
a user and that particular user
makes a request, right?
Makes a request where?
To your Express server.
So here is an incoming request
to the Express server.
Okay?
Now what this express server
is basically, right?
So if I go back, can you see that
you are creating an app here?
With this Express, you have
created an app, and now
everything that you do, like you
register your routes, you
register your middlewares, you
listen to this app that is using
this app object, correct?
That is using this app thing.
Now what Express does, Express
basically forwards this request or
gives the capability to this app
thing to handle this request, right?
So that means all the requests
that comes to your server, that
goes to this app variable.
So this is kind of your
request handler, okay?
So this is your
request handler thing.
Okay, that's good.
That's good.
Now what this app does, app,
basically reads that what kind of
incoming request you have, like if
it is a post request, if it is a get
request, on which path you are
sending the request, and smartly and
internally it figures out that on
which route that the code should be
executed, right?
So let's say if this was a get
route, so let's say that the request
was coming to a, get to books.
So what this particular
route is going to do, what
this app is going to do.
If the request is coming here,
this particular request will be
forwarded to the appropriate route.
This request will be forwarded
to appropriate route
in our case, this is the route.
So this particular request
is basically forwarded.
Just one second.
So this particular request
is forwarded to this route.
Similarly, if the request was coming
to, let's say, get books one,
so what this app will do, this will
smartly forward the request to,
to this particular function, right?
So that means this particular
request will be forwarded
to this particular route.
So these are routes, correct?
You have route handlers.
So this is the whole
purpose of the app.
So this is how you have
structured your, app right now.
And, and this whole part, this whole
part is handled by Express, correct?
So that means if I rewrite it again,
it's like, hey, you have a user,
okay, user is making a request.
That request goes to the app, okay,
that request goes to the app,
and app smartly routes the request
to the, to the appropriate route.
Now what are middlewares?
Okay, now in this particular whole
chain, where are the middlewares?
So what Express allows you to do is.
Express says that, hey, bro,
in this particular layer in
from app to route, you can define
your own custom middlewares.
Okay, what do I mean by these
middlewares is that you can write
a piece of code here in between.
So let's say that this is my.
Some piece of code.
So what will happen?
Every time this app
sends a request, it will not be sent
to the route directly.
This app, can actually
give the request access to you.
And then you can internally,
like, you know, you can internally
do something with this request.
For example, maybe you want
to log the request, right?
You want to log the request
to a log.txt file.
Maybe you want to do some
database operation.
So basically what it is
doing is it, this lets you
write an interceptor, okay?
So kind of an interceptor that
is sitting in between,
it's kind of a man in middle.
So there is a man in middle
who is between every request.
And whenever there's a request, you
can execute a custom piece of code.
This custom piece of code
can do literally anything.
A, database operation, some file
writing, anything that you want
to do, and then you can forward
the request to the root, right?
So this gives you a capability
to do anything between the request.
So this particular thing
is known as a middleware.
So this is what, this
is a middleware.
Okay, so now you have
got that what a middleware means.
A middleware is a piece of code
that runs in every request and which
sits between app and the router.
So if there is any request
coming to your route,
you can have a middleware
in between to run that code.
Okay?
So this was the very simple
thing of a middleware.
So middleware functions are
functions that have access
to the request and response and next
function in the application
request response cycle.
Okay?
So what middlewares can do,
it can execute any code,
it can make changes to your
request and response.
So let's understand
what they are saying.
Now this particular thing
is a very high level
understanding of middleware.
Now let me show you that
what middleware can do.
Let's say you have
an incoming request, okay?
So this is your incoming
request from the user.
So this request has to finally go
to a route, correct?
So I have omitted the app
and all that thing.
So what you can do is, number
one, there can be n number
of middlewares, okay?
It's not necessary that there
can be only one middleware.
There can be n number of middlewares.
So you can have five, you
can have 10, you can have
15 middlewares, okay?
So let's say that I write one
middleware here, then I write
one middleware here, Then I
write one middleware here, THEN
I write one middleware here.
So right now, how many
middlewares do I have?
I have four middlewares
and these four middlewares are
responsible for doing something.
Something.
For example, maybe this
is your JSON parser.
Maybe this is for, querying, maybe
this is for the validation that
if the request is valid or not,
maybe you can do something like,
hey, if you are a hacker or not,
and this can do something like,
you know, logging all the
requests so you can have multiple
middlewares.
Okay?
Now middlewares, middlewares can
do following things, okay?
Can do following things.
Number one, it can, it can
read the request, okay?
Number one is that it
can read the request.
For example, when a request
is coming, it will not go
to the route, it will go here.
And this middleware has full access
to the request object that what
kind of method it is, what kind of,
data it is coming
from, where this request is coming.
This middleware can read
the request, okay?
Secondly, this middleware,
this middleware, middleware
can terminate, or I should say
can terminate
the request response cycle.
Okay, what does this mean?
This is, this is
very, very important.
Okay?
This means let's say
this middleware was a hacker,
checking middleware, okay?
So this basically checks
that if you're trying
to hack something or not.
So what this middleware can do
when a request comes, let's say
request is coming to books, okay?
A get request is coming to books.
So this Particular middleware has
some algorithm written which checks
the request and it has detected
that, hey, you are a, hacker.
Do you want to allow a, hacker
to access to this route?
Because this is your
final code, right?
This is the final code that interacts
with the database that
does all the CRUD operation.
So this is your final code.
Now, do you want the hacker
to reach here?
Of course not.
Right?
You don't want.
So this, this middleware right here
can even send back the response.
This can terminate
the request response cycle.
This can end the response,
and boom, your request
response cycle is completed.
So user was never able to.
Okay, so this basically, you know,
rejected the call, or I can
say this returned the response.
So this middleware will never let
this request to go to other
middlewares or even to the route.
So middlewares can even terminate.
Okay, what else middlewares can do?
Middlewares, okay?
Middlewares can forward the request
to other middleware.
Okay, so what does this mean
if this user is not a hacker?
Let's say that this user was
fine, this is not a hacker.
So after the validation, this
middleware can route the request.
It can say, hey, I have done my work.
Here is the request.
Now, now it's time for this
particular middleware to execute.
Let me just make it like this.
So now this middleware will execute.
Now let's say that, his duty is
to do something, right?
So let's say his duty was to log it.
So once the logging is done, it
can forward the request to him.
Now this can do something like,
hey, are you logged in or not?
If you're not logged in, it
can return back, right?
Let's say user is not logged
in, it can return back
that, hey, please log in.
But if the user is login,
then it can forward the request
to another middleware.
Then this can do something, and then
finally it can call the route.
So this is how the middlewares
are working, right?
One after another.
So that means, middlewares always run
in sequence, okay, in sequence
as they are in the stack.
So that means what if this
middleware is A, this middleware
is B, this middleware is
C, this middleware is D.
The a middleware can either
terminate the request, right,
by sending the response back
to the user, or it can just
forward the request to the B.
It cannot directly jump to the C.
Okay?
So it can forward the request
to the next middleware in the stack.
So A will say, hey, I have
done my work and I allow you
to go to the next one.
Express will internally
forward this request to B.
Okay?
Now, B can either terminate
the response or it can say,
okay, I have done my work.
I have to forward this
request to the next one.
So he will be the next one.
So now he will do the work.
Now he can say, hey, if
everything is good, I want
to forward it to the next one.
If he will say the next
one, that is the route.
So that means you can just say,
that whether you want to pass
the request to the next one or
do you want to terminate it?
Okay, you cannot decide
on which middleware it should go.
So that is how basically
it works, right?
Right now you just have one
middleware that is app.use,
that you are using express JSON.
So that means what
this thing is doing.
Okay, what this particular
thing is doing.
Let me show you.
So right now in our
bookstore application.
Sorry for that.
Right now in our bookstore
application, when a request comes,
okay, what this middleware
does, okay, this middleware.
So this is a middleware.
If headers have, if headers
have content, type application/JSON
application, JSON.
What it does, it does
some parsing, right?
This is the logic of this thing.
So it will do some parsing and all.
And then call the next middleware.
It will call the next middleware.
Who is the next middleware?
Right now, next middleware can
again, be a middleware
which you have defined.
That is possible because
this thing has no idea, right?
What is the next?
It will just say, hey,
I have done my work.
Call the next one.
Now, next one can again be
a middleware which you have defined,
or it can be a route.
So in our case, right now
we have a route only.
So this calls the route.
So right now, can you see
any other middleware?
No.
So what will happen when
the request will come, it will
first go into this middleware.
This middleware will internally
call the next function, which is
in our case, routes.
But what if I create
one more middleware here?
Let's say middleware A.
So what will happen?
This can only forward
the request to middleware A.
And middleware A can decide whether
should I forward the request to
the routes or should I terminate it.
Okay, so can we see
the code to this JSON?
I, mean, you can see,
but yeah, that's fine.
Okay, so let me show you that how
we can write, our own middleware.
So shall we write our own middleware?
Let's see.
So what I can do is I have
to write a middleware here,
app dot use, and here you have
to Pass A function.
Okay, now this function has
access to the request.
You can read the incoming request.
If you want to end the response,
you can do this and, the next.
Okay, now let's say console log.
I am, middleware A.
Okay, I'm just saying it that
this is middleware A
and I just want to do nothing.
Can you see that?
Neither I am terminating the response
nor I'm doing anything.
Fine.
So what this will do is this is
actually holding on to
the request and I am not completing
the request response cycle.
So if I run the server.
Okay, let me just run the server
now, see what will happen.
Now this is very bad thing.
Let me just go to my thunder client.
If I make a get request
on books, what do you see that my
request is always stuck.
Do you see what happened?
That I am in middleware A
and this request is stuck.
Let's make a request on book one.
Okay?
So I have to first cancel this
request and do it again.
I am middleware A
and nothing is happening.
Nothing is happening.
Why?
Because this middleware
is holding on to the request, right?
So nothing is happening.
Let's do one thing.
Let's just say return response
JSON and I'll just say message.
Boom.
I am, a, middleware.
So what this middleware is
now doing is it is basically
returning the response back.
Something like this, right?
It is basically returning
the response back.
It is not letting
other middlewares run.
So now you will see that no
matter what I do, if I go
on here, I am a middleware.
If I make a get request on this
middleware, if I make a post
request, I, am a middleware.
Can you see that?
Always the middleware A is running
and it is returning the request.
So this middleware in the stack is
not allowing the other middlewares
or other things to run
because you have a early return.
What if I want that?
Hey, I have done my work.
Now I can just say, hey, next.
Okay, I can just call
the next function like this.
So this next function will
automatically call whatever
is the next thing.
If next is the route, it
will go to the route.
If next is something else, like it's
a middleware, it will go there.
So now if I run this code, let's
say if I make a get request, you can
see that we are getting books.
Right?
We are getting books.
Let's say if I make a request
to book one, you can see
everything is working fine.
Okay, let's create
one more middleware.
So app use again a function
request response and next.
Okay, now in this scenario,
what happens when you
have one more middleware?
Let's say that this is
your middleware B.
Okay?
Now this is your middleware B.
Now this next will
call this middleware.
If this was not there, then
the next is basically your routes.
But if you have one more
middleware, this next is going
to call this middleware.
So now let's say this
returns a response JSON
saying msg, message boom.
I am B.
So now what will happen is A will
console log itself, but it will
call the next function, right?
Next is this middleware.
This middleware will run, but it
will always return the response.
So that means A will run.
B will always return
back the response.
So now what you will notice is that
no matter what you call, you will
always get it from the B, right?
No matter what you're saying, you
can see A and B are running and you
are always getting it back.
Now let's say I want
to pass it, right?
I can just say next, right?
I want to just pass it.
So this will also pass.
This will also pass
and everything will work.
So middlewares will work
always in sequence.
See A and B.
So right now, how many
middlewares do you have?
You have three middlewares.
1, 2, 3 and 3.
This middleware does it jobs
and calls the next function
for this particular middleware.
Who is the next?
This is the next.
Now it does its job that
is just a console log and passes
to the next one.
So this one passes it
And that is where your roots come.
Now let me show you one
practical use case.
Okay?
Do you remember that thing that
whenever there was an incoming
request, we used to log it.
Do you remember that particular code?
So what I can do here is I can
say app, dot use I will write
a function, request response.
And next I want to create a log.
Okay, so let's create a log.
So log basically looks
something like this, right?
So you will have date do now.
And then you can just say, hey,
there was a request,
method, request method on which path
the request was coming.
So request path, okay?
And you can even do body and all.
And then what you can do is you
can use the FS module to write.
So const fs.
Okay?
Equals require the FS module
and I should actually say node fs.
So now what I can do, I can just
say fs.append file synchronous,
that is logs txt I want
to put up this log as UTF8
and then call the Next function.
So that means anytime
the request comes first, the JSON
parsing will happen.
Then you are going to create
a log and then
let the appropriate route handler
handle that particular request.
So now let's.
You can see that I
don't have any logs.
Txt file.
Let's get all the books.
Okay.
Oh, there is a logs.
Txt file.
Nice.
What is there?
This thing.
Oh, by the way, I again
forgot to do a slash N.
Okay, so don't forget this.
Now let's try to get a book by one.
Let's try to get a book by four,
which is of course 404.
Let's try to make a new book.
Right, So a new book
has been created.
So now if you see your
logs, can you see that?
Yes, everything is getting loud.
So that is the functionality
of a middleware.
So middlewares.
Okay, now if you read back.
Okay, now if you go back.
Middleware functions are
functions that have access
to request, object, response,
object, and the next function.
Right?
This is what we have.
Understood.
Nice.
In the applications request response
cycle, the next function
in the function in the is a function
in express which when invoked
executes the middleware,
succeeding the current middleware.
So that means it's saying, hey,
every middleware has access
to this next function which when
executed will call the.
Will execute the next middleware in
succeeding the current middleware.
What middlewares can do, it can
execute any code, it can make
changes to the request response
objects, it can end the request
response cycle and it can call
the next middleware in the
stack.
So this is how you can
create a middleware app.
Like it can.
It's a get app.
Use.
So this is also actually
a middleware function.
So yeah, you can just ignore it.
So let me just show you.
So see what they're doing.
They are creating a logger.
Do you see that?
They have created a logger.
This does something
and calls the next function.
Then you can just say app,
use my logger.
So what is happening is
on every request, on every request,
this middleware is going to run.
That is this one.
You are going to do a console
log and call the next one.
So this is your middleware.
Okay, now let me show you
some practical examples
where we use the middleware.
Okay?
So moving further, let's say
so you will have a request.
Okay?
So users are going to make
a request on some server.
So what we can do is when
the request will come, we
will have a middleware.
What this middleware will do.
Okay, what this middleware is going
to do is this is going to check
for the authentication check.
Authentication authentication
basically means that if user
is logged in or not, we can
write a logic that if the user
is not logged in, right?
If the user is not logged in.
So I'll just say not logged in.
So we are just going
to say forbidden.
So we are going to say, hey, you
have to be logged in, right?
So forbidden, please
come back logged in.
But if the user is logged in,
we can forward the request
to the appropriate route handler.
So this is one example where you
want to use a middleware, okay.
To protect your APIs.
Similarly, you can have one
more middleware in this tag
that is for authorization.
So that means let's say the user
is logged in, but now you
want to check if it is, if
he's authorized to do that.
For example, let's say user is
logged in, but he's trying
to access something which is only
restricted to the admins.
So what we can do is you
are logged in, that's fine, go
to the authority.
Middleware authority will say, hey,
you are not authorized to do this.
If you are not authorized, hey,
just return back the response.
Okay, you can just say you are
not authorized to do this, you
are logged in, that's fine,
but you are not authorized.
Okay, but if you are authorized,
if you are authorized, then
only I, will pass it
to the appropriate route handler.
So this is how in reality
we can use middlewares.
Got it.
So middlewares ensure safety.
The code is good, the code
quality remains good.
And you can see that how
the middlewares are helpful.
Okay, so that was all
about the middlewares.
So now moving further, we are going
to be using middlewares.
And one thing I really, really,
really recommend you is
to go through this documentation.
So this is nothing.
It's basically if you go into
the guide and you go in writing
a middleware, using a middleware.
So you can just click on here
and you can just understand
that what middlewares are
and why they are so useful.
Okay.
Like you can validate cookies
in the middleware, you can do
authentication stuff a lot.
So don't worry, we will do that.
Okay.
So I hope you have understood
the concept of middlewares in
express that how middlewares work.